---
layout: post
title: "Web Development 101"
date: 2018-01-04
---

While I was going through the process of learning programming, I read up a lot of material online and in books. Here's a brief summary of what you need to know if you want to tread this path too.

This first thing is of course knowing what kind of developer you want to be? Whether it is a full stack developer who works on the front and back ends of web-development, only a front-end developer, a web designer who basically designs brochures and websites, or a back-end engineer who creates APIs and manages databases.

The tools that you need are basically a text editor or IDE and a browser. The top text editors are Atom and Sublime, and the one that most programmers use is Atom. There are other editors that come with different programming languages, however, I found that Atom does everything that is needed to be done. Another tool that is needed is an image editing tool like Photoshop. I personally am very comfortable with CorelDraw and hence use that.

HTML/CSS is the most basic tech that is needed. Whichever language maybe used for creating the website, the basic building blocks would still be HTML/CSS. Hence, having knowledge of HTML5 is required, and for this, the easiest way is going ahead and building a simple website/blog from scratch (not on wordpress). Github Pages is a great place to start with HTML5. After basic HTML5, the topic that is needed is JavaScript. That means things like the various data types, functions, operators, etc.

Beyond learning basic HTML/CSS and vanilla JavaScript, it is important to learn HTML/CSS Frameworks. There are various frameworks available, like the Twitter Bootstrap, Bulma, and Skeleton. All of these have different functionalities.

Next, among JS Frameworks, the top options are React, Angular, Vue.js, and Aurelia.

**ReactJS**:
A framework that splits your webpage into components, helps you to create the components separately and then integrate the components. In other words, it is a set of libraries for creating user interfaces. For example on Amazon, for each product page, rating is a component that can be reused on all product pages. Similarly comments is a component, and so on. Hence, the product webpage can be broken down into multiple components.

One of the various server side languages/ technologies are required. Node.js is the easiest, fastest, and most powerful option, that works on the Java language. Another option is Python, which is a popular option that has great integration with almost everything. Other languages that are no longer very popular are PHP and Ruby, among others.

In terms of databases, there are relational (MySQL, SQL Server, PostgreSQL) and non-relational (MongoDB) options. Oracle is used by big enterprises, and Google cloud based databases (like Firebase) are an emerging option.

Server side frameworks also differ by the language that has been chosen. For Python, the most popular ones are Django and Flask. Django is high level and Flask is low level, meaning that Django helps the user by making things easy. For JavaScript, there are multiple options as well like Express and Adonis. Ruby on Rails is a popular framework for Ruby.

Content Management Systems are technologies that help customers to manage content (as the name suggests). The various options include Wordpress, Drupal and Joomla - that all run on PHP.

After an app is developed, deploying them required knowledge of Dev Ops and other applications. The cheapest and easiest option in today's times are cloud hosting services like AWS.

Finally, for building mobile applications, the top options are React Native, NativeScript, and Ionic. These are all frameworks or technologies that help to create and then to deploy applications which can directly be uploaded into the App Store.
